https://curriculum.learnalberta.ca/curriculum/en/gfc/PDE_7-9/PDE8?id=KP2y3mFOWkyoJAUXSSTScg

Organizing Idea
Food Literacy: A lifetime of optimal well-being and physical wellness is supported by prioritizing nutrition and food literacy.
Guiding Question
How can food literacy support nutrition and well-being?
Learning Outcome
Students explore connections between food literacy and health and nutrition.
Knowledge, Understanding
and Skills & Procedures
Resources
Knowledge
Nutritional and food safety information can be considered more reliable when obtained from credible sources, such as registered dietitians and government or public health agencies.

Nutritional requirements can change during different life stages; e.g., adolescents require additional calcium and vitamin D to support bone growth.

Nutrition Facts tables show quantities of calories, fat, saturated fat, sugar, and sodium, although serving size affects these values.

Larger portions can lead to overconsumption and increase risk of obesity and chronic disease.

The risk of disease and chronic health conditions can be reduced by meeting changing nutritional requirements across a lifespan.

Decisions related to food choices can be influenced by advertising and social media diet trends that may include misinformation.

Marketing strategies targeting youth and health claims on packaging can influence food choices.

Regular meals and snacks that include a variety of nutrient-rich foods nourish the body, support body function, and promote well-being.

Food safety practices to prevent contamination and spoilage include
handling food hygienically and preventing cross-contamination
chilling, cooking, and reheating food thoroughly
adhering to food storage and preservation instructions

Food additives, which can be natural, e.g., salt or lemon, or artificial, e.g., food colouring, help maintain nutritional value, extend shelf life, enhance appearance, and aid in processing, packaging, or storage.

Modern diets that include ultra-processed foods, convenience foods, and fast-food consumption can shape dietary patterns and habits over time.

Compared with processed foods, whole foods harvested from the land absorb nutrients from the soil, enhancing their taste, quality, appearance, and nutritional value.

Culture can shape food choices by influencing ingredients used, cooking methods, meal structures, and social customs related to food.
Understanding
Food literacy can be enhanced through an understanding of nutrition, food safety, and cultural considerations.
Skills & Procedures
Identify credible sources for nutritional information.

Explore ways nutrition supports growth and development.

Compare Nutrition Facts tables for similar food products.

Explain the difference between serving size and portion size and how this affects intake and overconsumption.

Analyze food options across various contexts for trade-offs between cost, convenience, availability, and health.

Consider the role of social media and advertising in food choice.

Relate food safety practices to the reduction of food contamination and spoilage.

Explore natural and artificial food additives.

Identify differences between processed foods and whole foods harvested from the land.

Discuss cultural influences on food choices.